# Welcome to Code the Dream's Ruby on Rails course!
We're so glad you're here. :)

## A little about Ruby
Ruby is an interpretted, object-oriented programming language that
was "designed for programmer happiness" in the 1990's by Yukihiro "Matz" Matsumoto. The Ruby community has a reputation of quirkiness and kindness and many have worked hard to make Ruby a welcoming language and community for beginners. One mantra of the community is the acronym "MINISWAN", which stands for Matz (the creator of Ruby) Is Nice So We Are Nice. Another early influence on the culture of the Ruby community was an artist and Rubyist who went by the name of "Why the Lucky Stiff" (or just _why). The following short documentary about _why's work features many prominent Rubyists.

https://youtu.be/64anPPVUw5U?si=84rwu1rs3o3BUlGa


## A little about Rails
> The reason most people use Rails is that it provides a set of defaults that allows developers to get up and running quickly, without having to make a lot of trivial decisions. (https://guides.rubyonrails.org/api_app.html)

One of the core philosophies of the Rails framework is captured in the phrase "Convention over configuration". If you were to write a web application in Ruby without using the libraries from the Rails framework (or similar libraries/frameworks), you would end up writing a lot of custom "configuration" code to do things like read and write data from and to a database. But since most web applications need to access data in a database, Rails includes a library to make those operations easy and standardized, so long as we follow the conventions Rails expects when designing our application.

You can watch this documentary to get an understanding of the history of Rails.

https://youtu.be/HDKUEXBF3B4?si=AbpgbyyerPqX-6NM

## Course objectives
In this course, we'll focus on learning the fundamentals of building and working on full stack web applications, including data modeling, application design, API design and the web request cycle. We'll also focus on learning to troubleshoot and debug our code, as well as the fundamentals of automated and manual testing. We'll learn these concepts using Ruby and Ruby on Rails, but the goal is to gain knowledge that is core to full stack web development regardless of language and framework. Then the next web app language and framework you learn will be an easier and faster journey for you. The tools we use as programmers are constantly changing, but the concepts are similar and often build on top of what came before. The ability to learn new languages and frameworks is an essential part of continuing to be a productive programmer. The more exposure and experience we gain with different languages and frameworks, the easier we'll be able to see patterns and analogies in new languages and frameworks we pick up. So don't fret over the question of "what to learn next" because one of the most important skills you can gain now is learning to learn. Enjoy the journey!

***
Checkout this developer's advice on the top 5 things to focus when learning to program.

 https://youtu.be/ujPDRl1q-dw?si=5fyn8BQg69z-nI3f

***

At the top of each lesson, we'll outline the lesson objectives and map those to the course objectives they support. Here's the full list of course objectives with details and a preview of what we'll be learning. Get excited! :grinning:

- **Design and implement a data model for a small Rails app**
  - Create and update an SQL database using Rails migrations
  - Implement ActiveRecord classes that model the database (including data relationships and constraints)
  - Use Rails console and a SQL GUI to interact with the data model, manipulate data and test a design
- **Design and implement basic CRUD routes for a small Rails app**
  - Use HTTP verbs, query parameters and post data as aligned with standards
  - Respond with statuses and data that align with standards
  - Implement standard authentication and authorization
  - Use Rails conventions when naming migrations, tables, models, routes
- **Use Ruby to implement CRUD and basic behaviors and functionality beyond CRUD in a Rails app**
- **Design and implement basic API routes for third party consumption**
- **Test a Rails app using automated and manual tests**
  - Design a test plan that encompasses all input scenarios
  - Create unit tests and request tests using Rspec
  - Manually test a Rails app
- **Troubleshoot issues in a Rails and Ruby environments using debugging tools and methods along with knowledge of the framework**
  - Tools:
    - Server logs (dev and test)
    - Debugger
    - Manual testing
    - Browser dev tools
    - Postman
  - Knowledge:
    - Understanding of the web request/response cycle
    - HTTP verbs and how a Rails app responds to requests
    - Understanding of MVC, other parts of Rails app (initializers, environments, Gemfile)
- **Use Rails guides, Ruby docs and gem docs to implement new functionality in a Rails app**

## How this course is structured 
### "Dream of Code" application
Suppose you manage a nonprofit coding school similar to Code the Dream. Consider all the things you would need to keep track of for students, courses, mentors, assignments, etc. Throughout this course, we'll build on an application that supports the needs of the coding school's administrators, students and mentors. 

### Your project
In addition to the "Dream of Code" application, you'll also build a project of your own that has similar functionality. You'll build on this project throughout the course, applying the knowledge you just learned to your own application. For example, in the first 3 weeks of the course, we learn about data modeling in Rails, then in week 4, you'll design the data model for your application and create the tables and Rails backend models. So it could be helpful to try to have an idea in mind as soon as possible, so that you can be thinking about your application along the way as you learn in weeks 1-3, and try to imagine what the analogous work would look like in your application.

### Project rubric
The project you build throughout the course should demonstrate the course objectives (as they apply). Here they are as applied to your project.

TODO rubric deets

### Project ideas
CTD projects in classes and practicums have traditionally allowed students to come up with their own ideas for their projects, so long as the project can fulfill the rubric. For some students, this is exciting and makes the project more fun, but some students may have trouble coming up with an idea that fits the rubric nicely. If you're one of those students, feel free to use any of these ideas directly, or as inspiration.

- A simplified Bookreads clone
  - Details TODO
- TODO Other ideas

### Resources and reference material
Whenever possible, we'll refer to the [Ruby on Rails guides](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/index.html), a thorough official source on the most common Rails features. And we'll refer to documentation for any specific gems (Ruby libraries) we use. Learning to read and understand technical guides and documentation is an essential part of learning to code. Because languages and frameworks are always evolving and changing, the things we learn today will be obsolete at some point in the future, and even ChatGPT may not know how to use the latest framework version for some time after a release!

The Rails Guides are a great practical source, but they are not formal documentation, so there may be things we want to know about the Rails framework and its API that we can only learn from the [Rails official docs](https://api.rubyonrails.org/v8.0.1) (or by reading the code -- the Rails framework is open source.) The documentation is intended to be explicit and precise, so it may not include tips on usage and examples, like the Guides.

This course also focuses heavily on the fundamentals of web development and the web reqeust cycle. A popular and trusted source of documentation on standards and API's essential for web development is [Mozilla's MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web).

### Tools
- Editor (VS Code or similar. Hopefully you have this installed from a previous course or from previous coding experience.)
- Terminal window (Either in VS Code, or via Terminal or iTerm apps on Mac, Command Prompt or (Ruby Terminal?) on Windows).
- Database GUI for Sqlite (There are many free options. I use Beekeeper, but you can do an internet search for other options if that doesn't work for you.)
- Postman 

