# Lesson 1
## Data modeling and reading data

## Lesson objectives
| Lesson objectives                            | Course objectives                        |
|:---------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|
| Read data from a relationally structed dataset | Design and implement a data model for a small Rails app |

## Spreadsheet to database
When our fictional code school, Dream of Code, was started, the organizers wanted to be lean in their processes, and therefore decided to use a multi-tabbed spreadsheet to track course offerings, student enrollments, mentor assignments, grades and more. Dream of Code organizers knew they'd want to eventually transfer this data to a database, so they set up the spreadsheet to mirror how they expected the data to be represented in a database.

Open [this spreadsheet](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Code-the-Dream-School/ruby-rails-v3/refs/heads/main/learns-app-content/lessons/assets/lesson_01/doc-data.xlsx) in a spreadsheet program like Google Sheets, Microsoft Excel, Numbers (on Mac) or LibreOffice Calc. You should see 7 tabs or sheets of data.

Let's focus first on the sheets titled `coding_classes`, `courses` and `trimesters`:
- A `trimester` is a term in which classes are held. Spring 2025, for example. In addition to a year and term, every trimester has start and end dates, an application deadline, and a unique identifier (id).
- A `coding_class` is a type of class offered, for example, "Intro to Programming", "React", "Ruby on Rails", etc. In addition to a title, a coding class also has a description and a unique identifier (id).
- A `course` is a specific run of a coding class in a trimester. For example, "Ruby on Rails - Spring 2025". This is why in the `course` tab, we see columns titled `coding_class_id` and `trimester_id`. In addition, a course has a maximum enrollment -- the 
max number of students permitted to enroll.

Watch this short video about the data model. 
TODO video that walks through data model ERD, relates to spreadsheet and DoC tasks.

### Task 1: Email current Intro students about upcoming courses
Suppose we need to send an email to all current students in the Intro course, encouraging them to enroll in a course for the upcoming trimester. To do this, we need to collect the following data:

1. The list of course names for the upcoming trimester
2. The list of email addresses for students in the current Intro to Programming course

To get the list of classes for the upcoming trimester:
1. Let's say the upcoming trimester is Fall 2025. What is the trimester id that corresponds to that trimester? (Get this from the `trimesters` tab.)
2. Looking at the `courses` tab, find the rows where `trimester_id` matches the id from question 1. For each of these rows, use the `coding_class_id` to reference the corresponding coding class on the `coding_classes` tab. 
3. For each row from question 2, fill in this template, replacing everything in angle brackets (<>) with the data you found above.

```
<course id>, <coding class name> - <trimester term> <trimester year>
```

## Reading data with ActiveRecord
Maybe you can imagine how managing all of the code school's data with a spreadsheet might become unweildy and error prone. Let's start building a web application to manage Dream of Code's data. Some of our coworkers have already gotten started, so let's clone the repository and see how we could have retrieved the data for the task above using ActiveRecord.

### Clone and set up the project
- Follow [these instructions](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/install_ruby_on_rails.html#installing-rails) to get your machine set up with Ruby and Rails
- Follow <TODO> the instructions in the Readme for the Dream of Code app repository to set up the app

After you get set up, watch this short video that gives an overview of the environment and some tools we'll be using in this course.
- TODO short video explaining terminal, app, rails commands, rails console, generators, database, database gui

### ActiveRecord
A core library in the Rails framework called ActiveRecord is responsible for the configuration code that allows us to interact with data in the database using Ruby classes. (We'll talk more about Ruby classes in future lessons, but they are similar to Javascript classes or objects.) Look over sections 1 - 2.2 in the [ActiveRecord Basics section](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_basics.html) of the Rails Guides.

### Let's see how ActiveRecord works.
The Dream of Code application already has a database set up based on our spreadsheet of data. Each of our tabs from the spreadsheet is now a table in the database, and each table is mapped to a special Ruby class called a model. Class names in Ruby are singular and Pascal case (a special type of [camel case](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Camel_case)), while table names are plural and [snake case](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Snake_case). ActiveRecord and Rails depend on this naming convention to work properly. We'll learn more about this later.

Look in the `app/models/` directory. Each file here is an ActiveRecord model -- a Ruby class that is associated with a table in the database. Open any of these files and the first line should be similar to:

```
class CodingClass < ApplicationRecord
```

In this case, `CodingClass` is the class name, and `< ApplicationRecord` indicates that `CodingClass` inherits from the class `ApplicationRecord`. If we open the `ApplicationRecord` class at `app/models/application_record.rb`, we see that `ApplicationRecord` inherits from `ActiveRecord::Model`. We'll talk a bit more about inheritance in a future lesson, but for now, just know that this inheritance from `ActiveRecord::Model` is what gives `CodingClass` (and the other models) the special connection they have to database tables.

In a terminal, start the rails console. The Rails console allows us to interact with all the classes and environment set up in the app in a command line "REPL" or "read evaluate print loop".

```
bin/rails c
```

Everything we type in the rails console prompt must be Ruby code. In the prompt, type `Trimester.last` and hit enter. 

```
  Trimester Load (1.6ms)  SELECT "trimesters".* FROM "trimesters" ORDER BY "trimesters"."id" DESC LIMIT 1 /*application='DocRails'*/
=>
#<Trimester:0x0000000121db9bc0
 id: 9,
 year: "2025",
 term: "Fall",
 application_deadline: "2025-08-15",
 start_date: "2025-09-01",
 end_date: nil,
 created_at: "2025-01-01 19:21:16.044837000 +0000",
 updated_at: "2025-01-01 19:21:16.044837000 +0000">
```

If we look back at our spreadsheet, we'll see that this displays the data from the last row in our spreadsheet. Now type `Trimester.first` in the command prompt and hit enter. We'll see that the data displayed here matches the first row in our spreadsheet. Now try `Trimester.all`. This should print all rows from the spreadsheet.

- `Trimester` is a model, or special Ruby class that is configured by Rails to map to the database table `trimesters`. 
  - We also have models `CodingClass`, `Course`, `Student`, `Enrollment`, which map to tables named `coding_classes`, `courses`, `students`, `enrollments`, etc.
- The methods `first`, `last` and `all` are ActiveRecord methods called "finder methods". You can find these methods listed in this (section of the Rails Guides)[https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_basics.html#read] Let's try some other methods mentioned in that section.
   - You likely learned to use the dot operator to access attributes and call methods in Javascript, so hopefully this syntax is familiar.

Let's find the course record for the Spring 2025 Intro to Programming course. Try this in the rails console prompt:

```
CodingClass.find_by({ title: 'Intro to Programming' })
```

- `CodingClass` is the special Ruby class (a model, like `Trimester`) that maps to the database table `coding_classes`
- `find_by` is a finder method on `CodingClass`
- `{ title: 'Intro to Programming' }` is a Ruby hash, and it's very similar to an object literal in Javascript.
  - A Ruby hash is a collection of key, value pairs. There is one key called `title`, and the corresponding value is a string 'Intro to Programming'. In Javascript, keys are strings, while in Ruby, keys may be strings, but they may also be a Ruby datatype called a symbol. For now, it's enough to know that symbols are frequently used to name keys in a hash but you can read more about symbols [here](https://www.rubyguides.com/2018/02/ruby-symbols/).

Let's continue gathering the data we need for Task 1. We want to get the id of the upcoming trimester, so that we can use that id to find the courses scheduled in that trimester.

```
Trimester.find_by(year: '2025', term: 'Fall')
```

Make note of the trimester's id in the output.

Now we can get the list of course records for that trimester by using the a finder method on the `Course` model. We're looking for courses where the trimester is Fall 2025...or where the `trimester_id` is the id we identified in the last query.

Because we want to find all courses in the trimester, not just one...we will use the `where` finder method, which returns all records that match the condition. The `find_by` method only returns the first match.

Note: Double-check that the id from your output and replace it here if your id is not 7.
```
upcoming_courses = Course.where(trimester_id: 7)
```

Now we need to get the list of course names for these courses. You'll see the `coding_class_id` listed on each course returned in the query above. When we did this task manually, we used these id's to manually reference the correct rows in the spreadsheet. We could do something similar here...

We could look up each `CodingClass` using the id in the output...

```
CodingClass.find_by(id: 1)
```

...then copy the title for each. But here's how we can get to the information we need in fewer steps using Ruby. Note that we set the result of our query for the courses to a ruby variable called `upcoming_courses`. Let's loop through each item in `upcoming_courses` and output the title of each course:

Type this in the console and be sure to type it out by hand rather than copying and pasting. Hit enter at the end of each line. The console knows to not execute the code until after `end` is typed.
```
upcoming_courses.each do |course|
  puts course.coding_class.title
end
```

So you'll see upcoming_courses output again, but above that, you should see the list of coding class titles! There's a lot of new Ruby code to unpack here, but hopefully you can read it and get an intuitive understanding of what's happening. To compare to Javascript...`puts` is similar  to `console.log` in that it just outputs strings to the console. And the first and third lines are Ruby syntax for iterating through a collection, similar to a `for` loop in Javascript.

For your assignment, you'll use ActiveRecord queries to retrieve the email addresses for the students in the current Intro to Programming class.


