# Lesson 2
## Creating and updating data with ActiveRecord

| Lesson objectives                            | Course objectives                        |
|:---------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|
| Learn to create and update data with AR      | Use Ruby to implement CRUD               |
| Learn to interpret AR SQL queries and interact with SQL data directly | |

In the last lesson, we collected data from our data set to do various tasks. Now, it's time to set up courses, enrollments and mentor assignments for the next trimester. So we'll learn how to create and update data in Rails using ActiveRecord. We'll also review all the ways data is represented and the purpose for each. Along the way, we'll gain more knowledge and experience with Ruby and object oriented programming. 

### Ruby classes, models & objects
Watch this video that gives an introduction to classes and objects in object oriented languages.

https://youtu.be/kHNhm4UL0Sg?si=hM6X9S_UpEg9Mo6h

Let's map the concepts in the video to what we've seen so far.

Our `Trimester` class is analogous to the `Dog` class in the video, and "Fall 2024" or "Spring 2025" would be analgous to the Jack Russell and German Shepard instances or objects. That is, we would reference them in code as instances of `Trimester`.

We mentioned previously that an ActiveRecord model is a special type of Ruby class. Each AR model corresponds to a database table, and each row in that table can be retrieved as an instance of the model. And for each column of the database table (remember, these are also the columns on our spreadsheet tabs) we have an attribute on the AR model. Similar to an object in Javascript, attributes of an instance are accessible using the dot operator.

Open the rails console and run the following:

```
spring2025 = Trimester.find_by(year: '2025', term: 'Spring')
```

Here we're creating a variable `spring2025` and setting it equal to an instance of `Trimester`. Let's access some attributes:

```
spring2025.year
spring2025.term
spring2025.application_deadline
```

On your own, for practice. Do the same exercise for the Fall 2024 trimester.
1. Create a variable and set it equal to an instance of `Trimester` with term and year Fall and 2024.
2. Access some attributes on that instance with the dot operator.

### Model.create
So far, we've only been reading data from our database. Let's use ActiveRecord to create a new trimester.

In a rails console, type the following and hit enter:

```
Trimester.create(year: '2026', term: 'Spring', application_deadline: '2026-02-15')
```
Let's take a look at the output:

```
doc-rails(dev)> Trimester.create(year: '2026', term: 'Spring', application_deadline: '2026-02-15')
  TRANSACTION (0.1ms)  BEGIN immediate TRANSACTION /*application='DocRails'*/
  Trimester Create (3.1ms)  INSERT INTO "trimesters" ("year", "term", "application_deadline", "start_date", "end_date", "created_at", "updated_at") VALUES (NULL, NULL, NULL, NULL, NULL, '2025-01-09 04:29:04.718650', '2025-01-09 04:29:04.718650') RETURNING "id" /*application='DocRails'*/
  TRANSACTION (0.1ms)  COMMIT TRANSACTION /*application='DocRails'*/
=>
#<Trimester:0x000000012ddd2948
 id: 10,
 year: '2026',
 term: 'Spring',
 application_deadline: "2025-01-09",
 start_date: "2026-03-01",
 end_date: "2026-06-30",
 created_at: "2025-01-09 04:29:04.718650000 +0000",
 updated_at: "2025-01-09 04:29:04.718650000 +0000">
doc-rails(dev)>
```
TODO short video explaining transaction, insert statement, attributes of Trimester, etc

### TODO (flesh out) - Introduction to SQL
- download the GUI
- copy the commands from the terminal into SQL, but update some things
- reference cheat sheet, tables, models, files, attributes, columns,

intro videos on SQL
- https://youtu.be/wR0jg0eQsZA?si=lf_0bb8QJtBNQ9vi  (intro to simple relational database, ERD (lucid))
- https://youtu.be/t9qpMYJAbGg?si=lHzpWfriUUuIvHcB (Using SELECT to select records from one table)
- https://youtu.be/37Tyv0k-Byg?si=bI9BpgvgU6HPf0Xo  (insert, delete)
- need a short one for joins

### model_instance.update
Suppose we decide to change the application deadline on the upcoming trimester to give students more time to apply. Let's update the trimester record using ActiveRecord (AR).

Recall from the video that classes have both attributes (including one for each column) and behaviors or methods. In the video, the Dog class has a `bark` method. All AR model instances have the ability to update the table row they represent using the method `update`. Similar to `create` and `find_by` (which are methods on the AR class, rather than on an instance), the `update` method takes as a parameter, a hash of attributes. We pass the attribute names (as symbols) as keys, and the new data are passed as values.

### More practice with relationships
Understanding and identifying the relationships between data is an essential skill for backend and Rails development. The entire application depends heavily on the data model, so it pays to plan carefully and make sure your data model design can handle the different types of scenarios you might encounter. Let's talk more about the different types of relationships. 

### belongs_to and has_many
Looking at the in the belongs_to section of the [Rails Guides](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/association_basics.html#belongs-to)

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Code-the-Dream-School/ruby-rails-v3/refs/heads/main/learns-app-content/lessons/assets/lesson_02/belongs_to.png

If we had models Book and Author, it makes sense that a Book would "belong to" an Author. Some data in our tables might look like this:

**authors**
| id | last_name | first_name | birth_year |
|:--------|:--------|:--------|:--------|
| 755 | Angelou | Maya | 1928 |
| 756 | Twain | Mark | 1835 |
| 757 | Steinbeck | John | 1902 |

**books**
| id | title | author_id | publication_year |
|:-----|:--------|:--------|:--------|
| 1822 | The Grapes of Wrath | 757 | 1939 |
| 1823 | The Adventures of Tom Sawyer | 756 | 1876 |
| 1824 | I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings | 755 | 1969 |

Each book record "belongs to" an author...as indicated by the `author_id` column on the `books` table. Any time a model "belongs to" another model, we can expect to see an id for the "parent" model on the "child" model's table.

We can also say that an author "has many" books. This relationship is indicated by the potentially numerous appearances of an author's id in the `books` table.

**Let's look at some other examples:**
1. `cities` and `states` 
   - A `city` "belongs to" a `state`. A `state` "has many" `cities`.
2. `doctors` and `patients`
   - A `patient` "belongs to" a `doctor`. A `doctor` "has many" `patients`.

### many-to-many (has_many, through: ) (association table required)
Consider the last example -- `doctors` and `patients`. Suppose we're designing a data model for a medical complex with many types of doctors. So a patient may actually have multiple doctors. Maybe the patient has visited a dermatologist, a primary care doctor and a general surgeon. So then our patient has many doctors, but still, every doctor has many patients. In this situation, we might be tempted to store all of the doctor ids on the patient somehow...

| id | name | doctor_1_id | doctor_2_id | doctor_3_id |
|:-----|:--------|:--------|:-----|:--------|
| 389 | Will Smith | 348 | 998 | 223 |

But then what happens when Bob needs to see yet another doctor? No matter how many columns we add, some patient will eventually need to see one more doctor than that. Also, it makes searching for a doctor's patients difficult because we have to look in muliple columns. So another thought is to store the ids in an array on the patient record

| id | name | doctor_ids |
|:-----|:--------|:--------|
| 389 | Will Smith | [348, 998, 223] |

This solution might technically work, but it's not the solution that most closely follows Rails conventions. The ideal solution in this case is to use an association table (or a "join" table). This is a model and table whose job is just to store the relationship between two other models.


**patients**
| id | name |
|:-----|:--------|
| 389 | Will Smith |


**doctors**
| id | name | specialty |
|:-----|:--------|:------|
| 149 | Dr. Sue Jones | Dermatology |
| 210 | Dr. Tamara Williams | Primary Care |


**patient_doctor_relationship**
| id | patient_id | doctor_id |
|:-----|:--------|:--------|
| 1299 | 389 | 149 |
| 1300 | 389 | 210 |

With the data structured this way, we only have to look in one column when looking either for all of a doctor's patients, or for all of a patient's doctors. And it's easy to join on another table with the results.

For this structure, we say a `patient` "has many" `doctors` "through" `patient_doctor_relationships`. And a `doctor` "has many" `patients` "through" `patient_doctor_relationships`.


## Associations in the Dream of Code data model (so far)
Below is a diagram of all our application's models (or tables) and their assocations (or relationships).

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Code-the-Dream-School/ruby-rails-v3/refs/heads/main/learns-app-content/lessons/assets/lesson_02/doc_erd.png

 We've discussed that a course is a specific instance of a coding class in a certain trimester. You see that `courses` has both `coding_class_id` and `trimesters_id`. So we can say...
- A `course` "belongs to" a `trimester`
- A `course` belongs to a `coding_class`
- A `trimester` "has many" `courses`
- A `coding_class` "has many" `courses`

What can you say about the associations `enrollments` have?

One thing to note is the `mentor_enrollment_assignments`. This is the table that associates mentors with students in a class. Why not associate a mentor with a student record? Consider this scenario:

- Sam Student is enrolled in both React and NodeJS in Fall 2024
- Minnie Mentor is a mentor only for the React class
- Minnie is Sam's mentor for React, but not for NodeJS
- Marcello Mentor is Sam's mentor for the NodeJS class (but not for React)

So the association between mentors and students must also include the `enrollment`. Since an `enrollment` "belongs to" a `student`, we can create an association between the mentor and the enrollment in `mentor_enrollment_assignments`, and then a `mentor` "has many" `students` "through" `mentor_enrollment_assignments`. (And similarly, a `student` "has many" `mentors` "through" `mentor_enrollment_assignments`.)


### Here are a few tips when designing your data model:
1. Start with actual data, then look for the patterns and extrapolate.
2. Test your design with other types of example data.
  a. For every pair of models, A and B, for example, ask if there's any scenario in which model A would be associated with more than one model B and vice versa.