## ActiveRecord associations and modifying a Rails database schema

### Adding new tables and models
#### Feature request 1: Allow student assignment submissions to be managed in the application

As of now, Dream of Code mentors keep track of student grades on their own throughout the course, and then just assign a final grade on the student's enrollment record at the end of the course. This has been problematic at times when mentors have lost student data or have left in the middle of a course due to emergencies.

So we need to add the ability to manage student assignment submissions and mentor reviews in our application. This means we'll need to store a new type of data, so we'll need some new tables.

Consider these requirements:
- A student should be able to submit an assignment for every lesson in their course
- A mentor should be able to review and assign a grade or result for the review
- DoC staff need to see the date an assignment was submitted and the date it was reviewed

So an assignment submission needs to store the following data:
- the student and course (`Enrollment`) the submission is for
- the time the student submitted the assignment
- the `Lesson` the assignment is for
- the `Mentor` who reviewed it
- the review result from a mentor's review ("successful" or "needs revisions")
- the time the mentor reviewed

So this new table and model will be related to three existing tables/models: `Enrollment`, `Lesson`, and `Mentor`. 

Is it possible that a single assignment submission would be associated to more than one lesson? How about enrollment? Or mentor? I'm not able to think of a scenario that would warrant a "yes" answer to any of those questions. So in each of these cases, the relationship can be defined with "belongs to". An assignment "belongs to" a lesson, enrollment, and mentor. Each lesson, however, will have many assignment submissions (one for each student), and each mentor will have many assignment submissions (one for each student and lesson). Also, each enrollment will have many assignment submissions (one for each lesson).

So that means the `submissions` table will have the following columns:
- lesson_id
- enrollment_id
- mentor_id

And to store the other relevant submission data, we'll add these columns:
- pull_request_url (link to the student's pull request)
- review_result 
- reviewed_at (mentor review timestamp)
- For the student submission time, we can rely on the `created_at` timestamp, which should be included on most tables along with `updated_at` as a best practice

**Create the new table and model**

The Rails framework provides a way to manage the database schema (the structure of the database -- tables, columns, etc) from within the application. Each database change is called a migration, and each change is described in a file in the `db/migrate` directory. You can check out the files that exist there now and see how the current database schema came to be. Since we need to add a new table, we'll need to create a new migration and learn the migration process.

Read sections 1-2.1 and also section 3.1.1 of the [ActiveRecord Migrations section](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_migrations.html#creating-a-new-table) in the Rails Guides before moving on with the rest of this lesson.

Now let's create the migration file for our new `submissions` table.

Let's use the generator mentioned in the Rails Guides to create an empty migration file. We should name it `create_submissions`

```
bin/rails generate migration create_submissions
```

In the output, you should see a statement that a new file was created. Open the file in your code editor...it should look like this:

```
class CreateSubmissions < ActiveRecord::Migration[8.0]
  def change
    create_table :submissions do |t|
      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

Following the instructions in the Rails guides, we should add the tables columns and datatypes inside the `create_table` block. In section, 3.1.1 Creating a Table -- Associations, we see that we should use the `references` type to define an association...

```
class CreateSubmissions < ActiveRecord::Migration[8.0]
  def change
    create_table :submissions do |t|
      t.references :enrollment
      t.references :lesson
      t.references :mentor

      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

And we'll add our other columns, making some decisions about datatypes here as well...

```
class CreateSubmissions < ActiveRecord::Migration[8.0]
  def change
    create_table :submissions do |t|
      t.references :enrollment
      t.references :lesson
      t.references :mentor
      t.string :pull_request_url
      t.string :review_result
      t.datetime :reviewed_at

      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

Now let's execute the `change` method in this migration, which will tell Rails to create the new table according to this description. To execute this method, we'll run the `rails db:migrate` command, which will run any migrations in the `db/migrate` directory that have not been run.

Rails tracks which migrations have been executed in the `schema_migrations` table. Let's see this in action. Open the schema migrations table in your SQLite GUI, and look at the last row in the table. The value should be the timestamp on the second to last migration file in `db/migrate`...something like `20250101191920`. Check the timestamp on the migration we just added.

Now run the migration. In a terminal window (not rails console):

```
bin/rails db:migrate
```

Now look at the `schema_migrations` table again. (You'll likely have to reload the data, maybe by clicking the table name again.) If the migration ran successfully, you should see the timestamp for our migration in the `schema_migrations` table now. This means if you run `bin/rails db:migrate` again, Rails will not execute that migration again, because it sees that it has already been run.

** Create the Submission model **
Great! Now we have a new table to store assignment submissions! Let's set up the corresponding ActiveRecord model.

In `app/models/`, create a new file called `submission.rb`. Recall that the naming here is important, because Rails relies on the name to properly map to the correct table. In the `submission.rb` file, we'll define the class and add the associations:

```
class Submission < ApplicationRecord
  belongs_to :lesson
  belongs_to :enrollment
  belongs_to :mentor

end
```

Now let's start a rails console and make sure we can create a new `Submission`.

```
Submission.create!(lesson_id: Lesson.first.id, enrollment_id: Enrollment.first.id, mentor_id: Mentor.first.id)
```

If you see an error of any kind, stop and figure out what the error is trying to tell you. Get some help from a mentor or classmate before moving on to the assignment.

**Associations / Relationships and the dot operator**

Here's one thing we haven't discussed yet about associations. Adding associations to ActiveRecord models, allows us to access the associated data from an instance via the dot operator.

For example, to access an `Submission`'s associated enrollment...
```
submission = Submission.last
submission.enrollment
```

Similarly with lesson and mentor. Also, when creating, updating or using finder methods, we can use the association name and pass an instance of the association instead of passing the id.

For example:
```
Submission.create!(lesson: Lesson.first, enrollment: Enrollment.first, mentor: Mentor.first)
```
This only works if we have the associations (`belongs_to`, etc) set on the models.
