# Lesson 5
## Ruby methods and testing

| Lesson objectives                            | Course objectives                        |
|:---------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|
| Implement behavioral methods in a Ruby class to pass a test spec | Implement basic behaviors in Ruby classes | 
| Run and modify Rspec tests  | Write automated unit tests using Rspec |

In the video we watched in lesson 2, we learned that classes have both attributes (dog breeds in the video, table columns in our case) and behaviors. We've discussed some behaviors that ActiveRecord models have in common -- the ability to update themselves, for example. But we will also often want to add behavior to our ActiveModel classes.

### Adding behavior to a Course with Test Driven Development
In the first couple of lessons, we collected the email addresses of students in a course in order to send a mass email informing them about upcoming classes. Emailing all students in a course is a pretty common need at the Dream of Code school, so let's write a function to do that work for us. Returning a list of enrolled student names and email addresses will be a behavior of a `Course`. One of our coworkers has already written the spec for this function, so we'll know the function is ready when we run the spec and it passes. This method of writing the test first is called Test Driven Development and it can be a helpful way to implement discreet bits of work.

To get a better understanding of what we'll be doing in this lesson, watch this short video about TDD.

https://youtu.be/uGaNkTahrIw?si=zAm_yDeToaA84TWM

TODO Short video 
- discuss the test environment (and dev, prod environment, briefly) point to environment files and database.yml, etc.
- walk through a few tests, describe directory structure, `describe`, `context`, `it`
- talk about test data setup

### Red, green, refactor
Let's first run the spec. Since the code hasn't been written yet, we expect all the tests to fail.

In a terminal, run
```
bundle exec rspec spec/<TODO spec/models/course_spec.rb>
```

Take a look at the output. We can see the test cases, which describe the expected behavior, and then we also see information about how many tests were run, how many passed and how many failures. If there are failures, there are details about where in the test the failure occurred, and why.

TODO walk through most tests for `student_email_list`

### Writing a test
Another behavior we'll want to add is on the `Enrollment` class. We'll want to know if a student has enrolled in a course after the application deadline. So let's write a method in the `Enrollment` class called `is_past_application_deadline` that returns true if the enrollment's `created_at` is greater than the application deadline date for the course the enrollment belongs to. You'll write the specs for this on your own as part of your assignment for this week. Take a look at `spec/models/enrollment_spec.rb` -- you'll see some data already set up to help you get started.

Here are some steps to help you design your tests:
1. What data determines the outcome of the test? 
  - What models and attributes / tables and columns are involved in deciding the outcome?
2. How many ways can we set up that data?
   - This doesn't have to be an exhaustive list, but it should include the "boundaries" and edge cases. In this scenario, consider the two dates we're comparing. The actual values of the dates are not important, but the relationship between the two dates is important. So how many different "relationships" are possible?
3. Start by writing the descriptions first -- describe a scenario or data setup in a `context` block, then write a description of what you expect to happen given that data setup in the `it` block.

