# Lesson 6
## Controllers and routing -- Reading and displaying data

| Lesson objectives                            | Course objectives                        |
|:---------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|
| Implement GET requests for data | Design and implement CRUD routes in a Rails app | 

Not all Dream of Code staff is comfortable working in the Rails console, so we'll need to build a frontend that enables staff to manage the school's operations.

Up to this point, we've focused most of our attention on ActiveRecord and the interactions between the database and how the data is modeled and manipulated within the application. Now we'll learn about the Rails web server, and how it receives and responds to HTTP requests.

As usual, our coworkers have started on a basic frontend, but we'll need to do the work to deliver the data to the views. But we'll need to cover some foundational info before we get started.

TODO 
You probably have an intuitive understanding of how the internet works. Watch this video for a brief, but thorough overview. https://youtu.be/7_LPdttKXPc?si=yI7dYDs1HAix5qz6

At the core of web development is the web request/response cycle. Watch this video for a brief explainer and then we'll discuss how the Rails web server receives and responds to web requests.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-DCze3ghdNU

TODO diagrams of request->response in Rails
- MVC
- routes
- middleware? 

## Displaying data on the frontend
Let's start small, and return a list of trimesters for school staff to view.

Here's the steps we'll follow:
1. Define the route (url + HTTP method) that will display the data when the user visits it, and map the route to a code that will be executed when the request is received.
2. Respond to the request (at the route from step 1) with HTML
3. Collect the data we want to display and include that in our HTML reponse

We'll follow a (manual) test-driven approach and verify each step along the way.

### Step 1. Defining the route
Our task is to display a list of trimester records on the frontend. Consulting the [the Rails Guides](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/routing.html#crud-verbs-and-actions), we see a table of "conventional" routes for "resources" or what we've been calling models on the backend. (Many times a model and resource represent the same data, but not always.) We see the first item in this list is described as "display a list of all <items>". To follow this convention, the url to view a display of all trimesters should look like this:

```
http://localhost:3000/trimesters
```

We refer to everything after `http://localhost:3000` as the "path". We'll use the HTTP verb `GET` when accessing this url. This is the default HTTP verb a browser uses when making a request to the url you enter in the browser's search bar.

Let's visit that route now and see what happens. In a console window, start your Rails server:

```
bin/rails server
```

Now in a browser, visit `http://localhost:3000`. You should see a page with the Rails logo that lists the versions of Rails, Rack and Ruby you're using. If you don't see this page, get some help before moving on.

Now navigate to the url where we plan to display trimesters: `http://localhost:3000/trimesters`

We see a page that says `Routing Error - No route matches [GET] "/trimesters"`. This is what we expect, since we haven't defined the route. Let's do that now!

In `routes.rb`, we map routes to code following this template:

```
http_method "/path", to: "controller#action" 
```
where `http_method` is one of get, post, put, patch or delete, path is as we mentioned above (like `/trimesters`), and "controller#action" is the name of the controller (without `_controller`) and the name of the action or method in that controller.

Looking back at the CRUD verbs and actions table, to follow conventions, our route will be defined like this:

```
get "/trimesters", to: "trimesters#index"

```
So when a GET request is made to `http://localhost:3000/trimesters`, the Rails server receives the request and then executes the code in the `index` method defined in `app/controllers/trimesters_controller.rb`.

Now that we have the route defined, let's test it out. Reload the page at `http://localhost:3000/trimesters`. Now we get a different error -- `unintialized constant TrimestersController`. This means the route is working -- the Rails server tried to map our GET request to the `index` method in `TrimestersController`, but it threw an error because we haven't created `TrimestersController` yet. So let's do that!


### Step 2. Respond to the request with HTML
In the directory `app/controllers/`, create a new file called `trimesters_controller.rb` as per the naming conventions for controllers described in [Rails Guides here](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/action_controller_overview.html#controller-naming-convention).

In this file, we'll define the class as per Rails conventions follows. Note that this is a special kind of Ruby class that inherits from a class called `ApplicationController`, which is part of the Rails framework.

We'll also define the `index` method Rails expect for the `/trimesters` route.

```
class TrimestersController < ApplicationController

  def index

  end

end
```

Okay, now that we've defined the controller and action Rails expects for the trimesters route, let's reload the page at `http://localhost:3000/trimesters` and see what happens now.

You should see an error message that contains `TrimestersController#index is missing a template for this request format and variant.`. The mention of a "missing template" is Rails saying that it looked for a template or view to use to respond to this request, but it couldn't find one that matched according to Rails conventions.

By convention, for each controller, we have a directory in `/app/views/` that contains a view template for each controller in the action. Rails will attempt to render the view named the same as the action. So in `/app/views/` let's create a directory called `/trimesters` and in it, a file called `index.html`. For now, just add any valid html to that file. (Maybe add a header with text "Trimesters".)

Now reload `http://localhost:3000/trimesters`. Do you see your html? Now we're getting somewhere! :)

### Step 3. Collect the data to display and add it to the response
Now let's update our HTML to display a list of trimesters. To start, let's just display the term and year of each trimester. If we were coding a static web page with this data, it might look something like this:

```
<h1>Trimesters</h1>
<ul>
  <li>Fall 2024</li>
  <li>Spring 2025</li>
  <li>Summer 2025</li>
  <li>Fall 2025</li>
<ul>
```

This is similar to tasks in earlier lessons (TODO -- update earlier lessons to make sure we're using loops and string interpolation) when we needed to format trimester data to match a template. In this case, our template is `<li>term year</li>` where we replace term and year with the trimester's term and year. We know how to do this in ruby with a loop:

```
Trimester.all.each do |trimester|
  "#{trimester.term} #{trimester.year}"
end
```

We can do something similar in our view. First, we need to change the file extension from `.html` to  `html.erb`, so rename the view file to `index.html.erb`. This transforms our view into an ERB template, which allows us to write ruby code in the view, which is then executed and added to the HTML before the server sends the HTML back with the response to the web request. Review the [ERB section](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/action_view_overview.html#templates) of the Rails Guides for a quick introduction.

Mostly what you should know about an ERB template is that it's an HTML file, but you can also add ruby code by wrapping the ruby with a combination of angle brackets and percent signs, with or without an equals as follows: 

```
<% Your ruby code here %>
```
 or
```
<%= Your ruby code that returns HTML here %>`
```

So in our `index.html.erb` file, if we had a list of trimesters we could update our code as follows to get a display similar to what we designed above:

```
<h1>Trimesters</h1>
<ul>
  <% Trimester.all.each do |trimester| %>
   <li><%= "#{trimester.term} #{trimester.year}" %></li>
  <% end %>
<ul>
```

Now reload `http://localhost:3000/trimesters`. Do you see data?? :) 

Look back at the ruby code and the HTML we had before and be sure you understand how we arrived at the ERB code above.

We're not quite done yet, though. It's a better practice to collect data from the database in the controller rather than in the view. Then we populate an instance variable in the controller that is made available to the view by Rails. Let's make that adjustment now.

In the trimesters controller, index method, create an instance variable called `@trimesters` and set it equal to all `Trimester` records:

```
class TrimestersController < ApplicationController

  def index
    @trimesters = Trimester.all
  end

end
```

Because of the special relationship between a Rails controller and action and the view, instance variables set in the action are accessible in the view. So we can replace `Trimester.all` with `@trimesters` in our view:

```
<h1>Trimesters</h1>
<ul>
  <% @trimesters.each do |trimester| %>
   <li><%= "#{trimester.term} #{trimester.year}" %></li>
  <% end %>
<ul>
```

Reload `http://localhost:3000/trimesters` to make sure this works properly. We always want to test our code manually as soon as possible after every change. If we make a bunch of changes and then try to load the page, if we have errors, it will be harder to find what went wrong.

TODO incorporate rails routes command and output

We can ask the `rails` executable to list the routes it knows about, so we can test that we've set up the routes correctly by running the following in a command line:

```
bin/rails routes
```

Refer to [this section](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/routing.html#listing-existing-routes) of the guides on the output of `rails routes`. Each route has up to four items listed. For now, let's focus on the HTTP verb, the URL pattern to match and the routing parameters.


## Testing routes with Rspec
TODO
- Now let's write a request spec

