# Lesson 7
## Controllers and routing -- Multiple model requests, Query params, JSON requests

| Lesson objectives                            | Course objectives                        |
|:---------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|
| Implement GET routes that require data from multiple models | Design and implement routes in a Rails app beyond resource CRUD | 
| Write request specs and practice TDD | Implement request specs using rspec |


### Dream of Code app requirements list
Our Dream of Code colleagues are happy to see the list of trimesters and mentors displayed in the app, and now they've given us a list of requirements for the app. In order of priority, here they are:

1. We'd like a dashboard that lists the courses for the current and upcoming trimester.
2. Each of those courses should link to a page that shows the list of enrolled students (for current courses).
3. On the dashboard, there should be a link to a form for adding a new course.
4. On each course page, there should be a link to a form to enroll a student in the course.
5. We need to be able to update the application deadline for the upcoming trimester.
6. Only Dream of Code staff should be able to view student enrollments, create courses and update trimesters.
7. Only students may submit assignments. Only mentors may edit them. A student may see their own info, but other students should not be able to. (There are a list of 'authorization' rules like this.)
8. We need an API endpoint that lists the students enrolled for a course.

We'll implement the first two this week.

### Dashboard of courses
We can reuse some of our code from the last lesson to build the dashboard. Here's a wireframe of what we'd like the dashboard to look like.

TODO wireframe

So we need some, but not all trimester data. And we need data from courses, but remember that the name of a course is stored in the coding class associated, since a course is a specific instance of a coding class. Let's follow the same steps we took in the last lesson:

1. Define the route, and map the route to a controller and action
2. Respond to the request with HTML (an outline with static data at first)
3. Collect the data we want to display and include that in our HTML reponse

For the route we need to decide:
1. HTTP Method
  - We're reading data (not creating, updating or deleting), so we should use the GET method or verb.
2. Path
  - Since this route does not fit the format of one of a "resourceful route", we can choose the path to just be something that makes sense, like `/dashboard`. There's no Rails convention to follow for that part.
3. Controller and action
  - Again, since our route is not a resource route, we don't have a prescription from Rails. Let's make a new controller called `admin_dashboard_controller.rb` and add an action called `index`. As we add more routes, we might decide to change how the controllers, actions and are structured or named. No need to worry about making the perfect choice the first time.

Now you have enough information to add the route to the `/config/routes.rb` file, so do that now.

Before we go any further, let's set up a request spec for our route. Add the spec file at `/spec/requests/admin_dashboard_spec.rb` with the spec stub:

```
require 'rails_helper'

RSpec.describe 'Dashboard', type: :request do
  describe 'GET /dashboard' do
    it 'returns a 200 OK status' do
      get "/dashboard"

      expect(response).to have_http_status(:ok)
    end
  end
end
```

Now run the spec -- it should fail since we haven't set up a controller and action yet. Add the controller and action (see above). Then add a view at `/app/views/admin_dashboard/index.html.erb`. Remember that Rails will look for a view to render using the controller and action name, so it's important to follow the naming conventions when adding view files.

Run the spec -- it should pass now.

### Outlining test cases and practicing TDD

Instead of reloading the browser after every step, we can write test cases for what we should expect to see in our view and 
then as we write the code, we'll see our tests pass. This helps us stay on track and be sure we're making progress.

So the dashboard view should...
1. Display a the current trimester name and term
2. Display a the upcoming trimester name and term
3. Display links to courses in the current trimester
4. Display links to courses in the upcoming trimester

That seems like a good start. Let's stub out those test cases in our spec file:

TODO consider replacing with an image so that students have to type it out
```
require 'rails_helper'

RSpec.describe 'Dashboard', type: :request do
  describe 'GET /dashboard' do
    it 'returns a 200 OK status' do
      # Send a GET request to the dashboard route
      get "/dashboard"

      # Check that the response status is 200 (OK)
      expect(response).to have_http_status(:ok)
    end

    it 'displays the current trimester' do
    end

    it 'displays links to the courses in the current trimester' do
    end

    it 'displays the upcoming trimester' do
    end

    it 'displays links to the courses in the upcoming trimester' do
    end
  end
end
```

We'll check the contents of the response body, which will contain the HTML. So if our page contains this HTML:

```
<h1>New Page</h1>

<p>Some content here</p>
```

A test for this page might look like:

```
it 'displays the header' do
  get '/new-page'

  expect(response.body).to include('New Page')
end
```

Follow along with this video to flesh out these specs and build the dashboard.

TODO video walkthrough for dashboard request specs and buildout

