## User accounts and authentication

Dream of Code App requirements
1. We'd like a dashboard that lists the courses for the current and upcoming trimester. :checkmark:
2. Each of those courses should link to a page that shows the list of enrolled students (for current courses). :checkmark:
3. On the dashboard, there should be a link to a form for adding a new course. :checkmark:
4. On each course page, there should be a link to a form to enroll a student in the course. :checkmark:
5. We need to be able to update the application deadline for the upcoming trimester. :checkmark:
6. Only Dream of Code staff should be able to view student enrollments, create courses and update trimesters. Only students should be able to create assignment submissions. Only mentors should be able to update assignment submissions.
7. We need API endpoints to integrate with external apps. 
  a. We need an endpoint that returns current course data.
  b. We need an endpoint that returns student enrollment data in a specific format (per course).
8. We need an API endpoint that allows for the creation of a student record.

This week we'll implement #6 on our request list.

We'll need to store user accounts and assign a role to users that allow or prohibit functionality based on their role. We'll also need to provide an authentication or login mechanism. We'll add the `bcrypt` [gem](https://github.com/bcrypt-ruby/bcrypt-ruby) to store passwords and provide authentication. 

Let's start by adding a user model.

A user record should store:
- username
- password_digest - This is a hashed or encrypted password
- role - This will be either admin, mentor or student

We'll use rails generators to create the migration. In a terminal,

```
bundle exec rails g migration create_users
```

Then open the migration file created and add the appropriate column definitions. Notice we require username, password_digest and role to all be non-null. Also usernames must be unique. These are all data-level requirements, so we should specify these constraints in the migration (and in the database schema).

```
class CreateUsers < ActiveRecord::Migration[8.0]
  def change
    create_table :users do |t|
      t.string :username, null: false, unique: true
      t.string :password_digest, null: false
      t.string :role, null: false

      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

Run `bundle exec rails db:migrate` to create the table.

### Authentication

There are a number of ways to implement login and logout in Rails. We'll implement a streamlined authentication using functionality from the `bcrypt` gem that is included in Rails. Adding `has_secure_password` to our User model adds methods for authentication and it also adds some validations to the User model as well. Read about `has_secure_password` in the [Rails API docs here](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveModel/SecurePassword/ClassMethods.html#method-i-has_secure_password).

Let's create the User model and add `has_secure_password`. We'll also require the role to be present on a user, and role must be one of `admin`, `mentor` or `student`.

Create the file: `/app/models/user.rb`

```
class User < ApplicationRecord
  has_secure_password
  validates :role, presence: true
  validates :role, inclusion: { in: ['admin', 'mentor', 'student' ]}
end
```

Now let's try creating a user in the rails console. 

Open the rails console:
```
bin/rails c
```

Then create a new user with a username and password of your choice. 
- Try NOT assigning a role.
- Then try assigning a role that is something other than the defined roles.

Does the validation prevent saving as expected?

### Login, logout and sessions

Let's create a login form and routes to allow a user to login and logout. When a user logs in, we use the methods provided by `has_secure_password` to authenticate using the username and password they provide. Then if authentication succeeds, we will set some info about the user in a session. When the user logs out, we remove the info from the session. Read section 6-6.1 about [sessions in the Rails Guides](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/action_controller_overview.html#session).

So we'll need routes for:

1. Displaying the login form
  - Just displaying a form, so we'll use the GET verb (GET /login)
2. Login form submission
  - We're creating a new session, so we'll use POST (POST /login)
3. Logout
  - We're deleting a session, so we'll use DELETE (DELETE /logout)

It makes sense to assign each of these to actions in a sessions controller - new, create and destroy, respectively.

So let's add the routes to `config/routes.rb`

```
get 'login', to: 'sessions#new'
post 'login', to: 'sessions#create'
delete 'logout', to: 'sessions#destroy'
```

And now let's create a sessions controller with these actions.

`app/controllers/sessions_controller.rb`

```
class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  def new
  end

  def create
  end

  def destroy
  end
end
```

We'll also need the login form. Recall that the view should be named the same as the action if we want to follow Rails conventions. Since we show the login form in the `new` action, the view should be named `new` as well.

`app/views/sessions/new.html.erb`

```
<h1>Login</h1>

<%= form_with(url: login_path, local: true) do |form| %>
  <% if flash[:alert] %>
    <div class="alert alert-danger"><%= flash[:alert] %></div>
  <% end %>

  <div>
    <%= form.label :username %>
    <%= form.text_field :username, required: true %>
  </div>

  <div>
    <%= form.label :password %>
    <%= form.password_field :password, required: true %>
  </div>

  <div>
    <%= form.submit 'Login' %>
  </div>
<% end %>
```

Now visit `http://localhost:3000/login` and view the form. This should work okay even without any code in the `new` action in the controller since the view doesn't depend on any data. We'll need to implement the `create` action for the form submission now.

Recall that when the user submits the login form, the app should:
1. Look for a user with the username in the params
2. If a user is found, try to authenticate them with the provided password
3. If authentication is successful, set user info in a session
4. If any of the above fail, return an error to the user and re-render the login form

1. Look for a user with the username in the params (and re-render the form with an error if none is found)

```
def create
  user = User.find_by(username: params[:username])

  if user
    # Success
  else
    flash.now[:alert] = 'Invalid username or password.'
    render :new
  end
end
```

Let's try this out. Visit the login form and fill out the form with any username different from any you've created. Do you see the error message?

2. If a user is found, try to authenticate them with the provided password. (If not successful, re-render login with an error.)

```
def create
  user = User.find_by(username: params[:username])

  if user
    if user.authenticate(params[:password])
      # Success

    else
      flash.now[:alert] = 'Invalid username or password.'
      render :new
    end
  else
    flash.now[:alert] = 'Invalid username or password.'
    render :new
  end
end
```

Let's try this out. Visit the login form and fill out the form with the username you created earlier, but with a different password. Do you see the error message?

3. If authentication is successful, set user info in a session

```
def create
  user = User.find_by(username: params[:username])

  if user
    if user.authenticate(params[:password])
      # Let's set user_id and also role
      session[:user_id] = user.id
      session[:role] = user.role
      redirect_to root_path
    else
      flash.now[:alert] = 'Invalid username or password.'
      render :new
    end
  else
    flash.now[:alert] = 'Invalid username or password.'
    render :new
  end
end
```

Okay, now let's try logging in. Submit the login form with the username and password you created earlier. Did you get redirected to the root path?

### User role behavior

So login is working now, but it's a bit difficult to tell when we're logged in and who we're logged in as. Let's add a welcome message to the nav bar that let's us know who is logged in. And let's also add login and logout links to the nav bar. A `Logout` link will show if we're logged in, and a `Login` link will show if we're logged out. We won't go over this logic in detail, but you should review the code yourself and try to understand it. The gist is, we know if a user is logged in if there is a `user_id` set in the session.

Update `app/views/layouts/application.html.erb` with this code:

```
  <body>
    <div class="header">
      <nav class="navbar navbar-expand-lg d-flex justify-content-between align-items-end">
        <div class="d-flex align-items-end">
          <%= image_tag 'doc.png', alt: 'Dream of Code', height: '100' %>
          <ul class="navbar-nav">
            <% if session[:user_id] %>
              <li class='nav-item'>
                <% user = User.find_by(id: session[:user_id]) %>
                <% if user %>
                  <span class="nav-link">Welcome, <%= user.username %>!</span>
                <% end %>
              </li>
            <% end %>
          </ul>
        </div>
        <div class="login-logout">
          <% if session[:user_id] %>
            <%= button_to 'Logout', logout_path, method: :delete, class: 'logout-link nav-link', data: { confirm: 'Are you sure you want to log out?' } %>
          <% else %>
            <%= link_to 'Login', login_path, class: 'logout-link nav-link' %>
          <% end %>
        </div>
      </nav>
    </div>
    <div class='container main-container'>
      <%= yield %>
    </div>
  </body>
```

Try out the links and be sure you see the welcome message when logged in. Check that the login and logout links work as well.

### Restricting routes based on user role

Now we're ready to restrict access based on user role. As mentioned, only admins should be permitted to create courses and trimesters. Let's first set up some user accounts for each role so that we can have logins to test with.

** Create users for each role **
In the rails console,
- Create a user with the role of admin
- Create a user with the role of student
- Create a user with the role of mentor
- Log in through the app at http://localhost:3000/login for each user to test they've been created correctly

Make sure to save username and password info for each of your users. 

** Restricting access **

Let's consider how to restrict access to those routes for mentors and students.

Whenever we can avoid executing code unnecessarily, we should! When the Rails server receives a request from a logged in user, we should check to see if the user has permission to access that route before executing any code in the action. Rails provides a callback method on controllers called `before_action` for just this purpose. Read section 7.1 on `before_action` in the [Rails Guides](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/action_controller_overview.html#before-action).

We can use `before_action` to specify a custom method to run before the action executes. Our custom method can redirect the user elsewhere if they shouldn't access the route they've requested.

** TDD with manual testing **
First, log in as your student user. Then access `http://localhost:3000/dashboard`. This is the admin dashboard, so students should not have access to this, but of course, right now access is unrestricted, so you should see the dashboard. Let's fix that.

** Setting up the custom redirect method to protect admin routes **

Let's create a method called `require_admin` that will redirect a user to the root path and display a flash alert if they try to access an admin route and they're not logged in as an admin. Since we'll need to access this method in multiple controllers, we'll define it in the `ApplicationController` so that it's accessible to all controllers.

In `app/controllers/application_controller.rb`,

If the `role` in session is not admin, set a flash alert message and redirect the user to root:
```
  def require_admin
    if session[:role] != 'admin'
      flash[:alert] = 'You do not have access to that page'
      redirect_to root_path
    end
  end
```

Now let's pass this method to `before_action` in `AdminDashboardController`. Notice we pass the method name as a symbol to `before_action`.

In `app/controllers/admin_dashboard_controller.rb`

```
class AdminDashboardController < ApplicationController
  before_action :require_admin
```

Now log in as your student user and try to access `http://localhost:3000/dashboard`. You should be redirected to `/` and you should see the flash alert message. Log out and try to access the dashboard again. Then log in with your admin user and ensure you're able to access the dashboard.

Great job! You'll implement the rest of this task as your assignment for this week.
