# Lesson 13
## Designing an API

| Lesson objectives                            | Course objectives                        |
|:---------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|
| Design and implement an API for a third party system | Design and implement basic API routes for third party consumption | 

Dream of Code App requirements
1. We'd like a dashboard that lists the courses for the current and upcoming trimester. :checkmark:
2. Each of those courses should link to a page that shows the list of enrolled students (for current courses). :checkmark:
3. On the dashboard, there should be a link to a form for adding a new course. :checkmark:
4. On each course page, there should be a link to a form to enroll a student in the course. :checkmark:
5. We need to be able to update the application deadline for the upcoming trimester. :checkmark:
6. Only Dream of Code staff should be able to view student enrollments, create courses and update trimesters. Only students should be able to create assignment submissions. Only mentors should be able to update assignment submissions.
7. We need API endpoints to integrate with external apps. :checkmark:
  a. We need an endpoint that returns current course data.
  b. We need an endpoint that returns student enrollment data in a specific format (per course).

This week we'll implement #7 from our request list.

Dream of Code has an external service they've purchased to manage student engagement. This system analyzes student progress data in order to make suggestions about course curriculum and to notify mentors of students needing attention. The system will pull data from our application on a daily basis, and it expects data to be in a specific format.

Here are the endpoints the system will poll daily:

- Current courses
  - This should be an API endpoint that returns a list of current courses with their list of assignments (and ids).

- Course enrollment data
  - This should be an API endpoint that returns a list of students in a course and all info about their assignment submissions for the course.

Instead of wireframes, we've been given the expected data shape in the form of sample data. Here's what the system expects for each endpoint:

GET http://localhost:3000/courses (with header: `Content-Type: application/json`)
```

```

GET http://localhost:3000/courses/:id/enrollments (with header: `Content-Type: application/json`)
```

```
TODO
- find some intro to JSON/API design video content
- also video content specific to Rails API endpoints
- walk through fleshing out API endpoint per spec
- instruction on using Postman to test the route
