# Lesson 14
## Designing an API (part 2)

| Lesson objectives                            | Course objectives                        |
|:---------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|
| Design and implement an API for a third party system | Design and implement basic API routes for third party consumption | 

Dream of Code App requirements
1. We'd like a dashboard that lists the courses for the current and upcoming trimester. :checkmark:
2. Each of those courses should link to a page that shows the list of enrolled students (for current courses). :checkmark:
3. On the dashboard, there should be a link to a form for adding a new course. :checkmark:
4. On each course page, there should be a link to a form to enroll a student in the course. :checkmark:
5. We need to be able to update the application deadline for the upcoming trimester. :checkmark:
6. Only Dream of Code staff should be able to view student enrollments, create courses and update trimesters. Only students should be able to create assignment submissions. Only mentors should be able to update assignment submissions.
7. We need API endpoints to integrate with external apps. :checkmark:
  a. We need an endpoint that returns current course data.
  b. We need an endpoint that returns student enrollment data in a specific format (per course).

Nearly done with our Dream of Code app MVP (minimum viable product)! Let's implement the last half of #7.

Recall that we need to create an endpoint that allows the student engagement system to create a mentor record in our Dream of Code application. 
