## Lesson 3 Assignment
### Question 1
#### Feature request 2: Add lesson topics and the ability to associate lessons with topics
At Dream of Code, some courses may have topics in common with other courses. All the backend courses, for example, have lessons on data modeling and on the web request cycle. And the Introduction to Programming and React courses both have some lessons on CSS. Dream of Code would like to add tags to course lessons so that a student can easily search for all DoC lessons on a certain topic, regardless of what course the lessons come from. Of course, a topic will have many lessons, and there will certainly be lessons that span many topics. So the relationship between topics and lessons will be "many-to-many", which means we'll need a join table, in addition to a new topics table. Follow the steps below to decide the structure of the tables you'll need to add, and use the Rails Guides in addition to the content from the lesson to create migrations for the tables and add the corresponding ActiveRecord models.

Here are the topic titles that we'll need to store:
- SQL
- Data Modeling
- Javascript
- CSS
- Automated Testing
- Debugging
- Web Request Cycle
- HTTP

1. What tables do you need to add? Decide on table names and their associations to each other and any existing tables/models.
2. What columns are necessary for the associations you decided on?
3. What other columns (if any) need to be included on the tables? What other data needs to be stored?
4. Write out each table's name and column names with data types.
5. Determine the generator command you'll need to create the migration file and run the command to generate the empty migration file. **Start with just the topics migration.** (Hint: your filename should be `create_topics`)
6. Inside the `create_table` block in the migration file, add the appropriate columns and datatypes.
7. Run the migration with `bin/rails db:migrate` (in a terminal window, not a rails console). Watch the output and make sure it is successful before moving on. (You can check the database to see if your table exists.)
8. Add the `Topic` model before moving on.
9. Now determine the generator command you'll need to create the migration file for the join table. Don't forget that it should begin with `create_` and be followed by the table name.
10. Inside the `create_table` block, add associations to topics and lessons with `t.references :topic` and `t.references :lesson`
11. Run the migration.
12. If the migration run was successful, create the model for your join table (be sure the name matches Rails conventions).
13. Open the console and test your new models by creating the topics above and adding them to some lessons.

### Question 2
Answer this question in a markdown file called `lesson_03_question_3.md` and add it to your doc-rails repository.

Suppose we want to store our music collection in a relational database. 

Assume the following:
- We want to store artists, albums, songs and media type (vinyl, CD, cassette, mp3)
- Every album has an artist
- Every song belongs to an album

Create an ERD to represent how you would store the data. No need to use an ERD creation tool. A simple sketch will work, or you can even do this in text if you prefer, just be sure to include foreign keys where appropriate.

Then outline the models for each entity in your diagram and include all ActiveRecord associations (`has_many`, `belongs_to`, etc) for each.

