## Lesson 4 Assignment
At this point, hopefully you've received feedback on your plan for your data model from week 2. This week, you'll use what you learned about generating migrations and creating models to create migrations, tables and models for your own project.

### Create a new rails project and repository
In a terminal window, navigate to your source directory (wherever you keep your code, but not inside another project). Decide what you want to call your project -- something short but meaningful, and use only lowercase letters and hyphens. Type the following to create a new rails repo (replace your-app-name with the name you chose):

```bash
rails new your-app-name --skip-test
```

(We're skipping tests because we'll add a test framework later.)

After the command completes, you'll have a directory named the same as your app. Navigate to the root of that directory and execute:

```bash
bundle install
```

This installs the gems your app depends on and creates a Gemfile.lock that contains version details about those gems.

Now do a quick test to make sure the app starts up.

```bash
bin/rails s
```

This should start the rails server and listen on port 3000 by default. (If you get an error, check to see if you have another project running on port 3000, like the dream of code application. Stop any other applications and try again.)

Now navigate to `http://localhost:3000` in a browser. You should see the Rails logo screen. If you do, you can stop the rails server (Ctrl + C)

Init the git repo 

```bash
git init
```

And make an initial commit

```bash
git commit -am "Initial commit"
```

Now create a [new repository](https://github.com/new) on github (ensure it's set to Public) and follow the steps on github titled "or push an existing repository from the command line". The commands will look similar to this, but you'll need to replace with your own github username and repo name:

```bash
git remote add origin https://github.com/ghusername/your-app.git
git branch -M main
git push -u origin main
```

Now you're ready to start building your app!

### Create migrations and models
When you're ready to create your migrations, tables and models, create them one at a time and check the outcome after each migration run.

It's important that you create dependent models first. That is, if you have a model that "belongs to" a different model, you will need to create the "parent" model and table first.
1. Generate your migration and model:
   ```bash
   bundle exec rails generate ...
   ```
2. Run the migration to create the database table and update `db/schema.rb`
   ```bash
   bundle exec rails db:migrate
   ```
   Watch for errors and don't move on if you have errors. Read the error and try to fix the migration. (This is a time when it may be okay to ask ChatGPT for help if you can't figure it out. But be sure to read the explanation and try to understand the fix.)
3. Repeat the steps above with the next model.


### A tip about many-to-many relationships
If you find yourself wanting to store multiple items in one column or attribute, it's likely that you'll be better served with another table and an association. 

For example, suppose we want to store which trimesters a mentor has agreed to volunteer for. It might sound reasonable to add a column to the `mentors` table called `assigned_trimesters`, which would hold an array of trimester id's. However, if we want to take advantage of ActiveRecord's `has_many` association (which would allow something like `mentor.trimesters`), we'll want to add a "join" or "association" table that holds the relationship between mentors and trimesters. We might call it `mentor_trimester_assignments`, and it would have columns `mentor_id` and `trimester_id`.

### Assignment submission
Your assignment this week will be a link to your new Github repo with your migrations and models. Keep your ERD for reference and to discuss with your mentor.

### Friendly tip
Remember the advice from the developer in the video from the intro lesson...you learn when you fail, not when you succeed. This is a very friendly place to fail as there are no negative consequences from a "needs revisions" review!

