## Lesson 5 Assignment

### Question 1
Finish the feature request we started in the lesson by adding a method to the Course class that returns a list of email addresses for the enrolled students.

1. There are rspec tests for the method in the `spec/models/course_spec.rb` file already, but they are skipped by rspec when the tests in that file are run because of the `:skip` attribute in the describe block for that method. Remove the `:skip` attribute and run the specs. So this line `describe '.student_email_list', skip: true do` becomes `describe '.student_email_list' do`.
2. Run just the `.student_email_list` tests by specifying the line number of the describe block as follows. You may need to update 101 to your line number -- it should be the line number for the describe block `describe '.student_email_list' do`.
    ```
    bundle exec rspec spec/models/course_spec.rb:101
    ```

3. You should see the spec failures in the output. Just as in the lesson, the first test checks for the existence of the method. Make that test pass before moving on to the next test, and so on.

When your method causes all the tests to pass, make a commit with a meaningful message like "Implement student_email_list on Course".

### Question 2 - Add rspec to your project
Watch this video on installing Rspec and creating a new model test. Add the [rspec-rails gem](https://github.com/rspec/rspec-rails) to your project and write at least one test for a model in your application to ensure its set up properly. Be sure to review the installation and usage notes on the gem page in addition to watching the video.

https://youtu.be/-uhFA74eBG0?si=ZHUYWzCjEG-D55Pb

Your assignment submission this week should include links to your project repo and your dream of code app repo.

## Extra Challenge: More practice writing model tests
Another behavior we'll want to add is on the `Enrollment` class. We'll want to know if a student has enrolled in a course after the application deadline. So let's write a method in the `Enrollment` class called `is_past_application_deadline` that returns true if the enrollment's `created_at` is greater than the application deadline date for the course the enrollment belongs to. You'll write the specs for this on your own as part of your assignment for this week. Take a look at `spec/models/enrollment_spec.rb` -- you'll see some data already set up to help you get started.

Here are some steps to help you design your tests:
1. What data determines the outcome of the test? 
  - What models and attributes / tables and columns are involved in deciding the outcome?
2. How many ways can we set up that data?
   - This doesn't have to be an exhaustive list, but it should include the "boundaries" and edge cases. In this scenario, consider the two dates we're comparing. The actual values of the dates are not important, but the relationship between the two dates is important. So how many different "relationships" are possible?
3. Start by writing the descriptions first -- describe a scenario or data setup in a `context` block, then write a description of what you expect to happen given that data setup in the `it` block.