## Lesson 7 Assignment
### Question 1
In addition to the current trimester, we want to display the next upcoming trimester on the admin dashboard as well. We'll define the upcoming trimester as follows: if a trimester's start_date is less than 6 months from today's date, that trimester is the upcoming trimester. (If more than one trimester meets that criteria, the first match is the upcoming trimester.)

Use the instruction from the lesson as a guide to complete the steps:

1. Add a new test to the `describe 'GET /dashboard'` block in `app/views/admin_dashboard/index.html.erb` called "displays the upcoming trimester". Create a trimester in the before block that matches the criteria for "upcoming trimester" described above. Set up the expectation for the test (expect that the page includes the trimester term and year, separated by a hyphen). Run the test (it should fail).
2. Update the admin dashboard view to include the expected string. Run the test (it should pass).
3. Create a new instance variable in the `index` action of `admin_dashboard_controller.rb` and set it to the upcoming trimester.
4. Update the view to retrieve the upcoming trimester's term and year from the instance variable. Run the test and ensure it passes.
              
### Question 2
Implement a route that displays a course and the names of all students enrolled in that course. Add a request spec with test cases that expect the course name and at least one student name. Then update the dashboard course links to route to the appropriate course page.

Follow the steps we used in the lesson to define the new route:
1. Define the route, and map the route to a controller and action
  - Will this be a "resourceful route" or not? Use the [Rails Guides](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/routing.html#crud-verbs-and-actions) as reference.
  - If it's a resourceful route. Be sure to follow Rails conventions when defining the route, controller and action.
2. Respond to the request with HTML (an outline with static data at first)
3. Collect the data to display and include that in the HTML reponse
