## Lesson 8 Assignment

This week, you'll implement views that display data in your own project. Start with your requirements list and then sketch out some wireframes for the views you'll implement. Make a list of each of the views and then follow the steps for creating a route and view in the previous lessons:

1. Sketch wireframes for the views/routes you'll implement
2. Consider what data is required for the views -- does the data come from mostly one model/resource, or are there several resources involved? This will help you decide if your route is a "resourceful route" (like in [this table](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/routing.html#crud-verbs-and-actions)) or a non-resource route (like `/dashboard` in the last lesson).

3. Follow the steps from the previous lessons to implement your routes and views
  - Steps:
    1. Define the route, and map the route to a controller and action
    2. Respond to the request with HTML (an outline with static data at first)
    3. Collect the data we want to display and include that in our HTML reponse
  - Be sure to test your routes at every step. You can do this manually, or as a stretch goal, write out your test cases in a request spec and use test driven development to guide you. Either way, be sure to include request specs for each of your new routes.

### Some notes:
- If your views require filtering or sorting, just implement the basic view without that functionality for now.
- Don't worry about restricting routes to a specific user role right now. We'll implement that later as well.

