## Lesson 9 Assignment

### Question 1 - Add dropdowns to New Course
Instead of requiring the user to know the id for the coding class and trimester they're creating a course for, it would be nice to display a dropdown of valid options on the new course form. Use the info about form helpers from Rails Guides to change the text inputs for coding class and trimester to dropdowns. Note that the value of the dropdown should be the id for the coding class and trimester. Ensure that the params look the same after you switch the form inputs. Use a debugger to check the value of params if you need to.

Use a combination of year and term when displaying the trimester options. As an extra challenge, add an instance method to the Trimester class called `display_name` that returns the term and year as a single string separated by a space. Use this method when displaying trimester options in the dropdown.

### Implement a form for updating a trimester
Updating a resource is similar to creating a new resource -- we need to a route and view display the update form, and we need a route to handle the form submission. In the [Rails Guides CRUD, Verbs and Actions table](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/routing.html#crud-verbs-and-actions), we see a row for "return an HTML form for editing" and a row for "update a specific <resource>". You have the information you need in this table to set up the routes to display the edit form and to update a trimester on form submission.

1. Follow the steps we've been following in lesssons to create the route and view you need to display the form.
2. Write a request spec for the edit route that expects the application deadline label to be present in the response body. Be sure your test passes.
3. Follow the steps to create a route to update a trimester with a new application deadline. The edit form data should be sent as data in a PUT request to that route.
4. Write a request spec with the following tests (and ensure your code passes them):
    - When a PUT request is made with an application deadline that is a valid date, and a trimester exists for the trimester id included in the request, a trimester's application deadline is updated as expected (per request data)
    - When a PUT request is made without an application deadline, the test expects the response status to be 400 (or `:bad_request`). 
    - When a PUT request is made and the application deadline is not a valid date, the test expects the response status to be 400 (or `:bad_request`). 
    - When a PUT request is made to a route with a trimester id that does not belong to an existing trimester, the test expects the response status to be 404 (or `:not_found`)
